# AI Text Detector - Was this text generated by an AI?

This script uses an ensemble of models on *Word DOCX* and *PDF* files to attempt to answer the question *"Was this text generated by AI?"*

As input, it takes a folder, then assesses all *Word DOCX* and *PDF* files in that folder, and then outputs its assessment into an *Excel XLSX* file.

The script is intended to run on a standard PC or laptop, without any special hardware. Everything happens on your *local* computer - the script does not send the text anywhere and does not require any *API keys*, etc.

## The Problem

While there are many easy-to-use tools for assessing whether given text was generated by a Large Language Model (LLM) or generative artificial intellifence (genAI), these typically come with at least one of the following challenges: requirement to paste or upload the text online, which exposes the user to privacy risk and the risk that the models might use the text for training. These tools are often also expensive to use - free tiers, if any, are exhausted quite quickly, especially for sizable texts. These tools often require individual files to be assessed one by one. And as AI-detection is inherently probabilistic, any of these tools using a single method is likely to make mistakes in unpredictable (*not easy to predict for normal people*) ways.

This script addresses some of these:
* **Zero data exposure**: This script runs entirely on your work or home computer and does not send the text to any remote location such as a website or LLM.
* **Batch processing**: This script bulk processes a folder-ful of files in one pass.
* **Ensemble**: This script uses an ensemble to methods and models for its assessment.

## Usage

### Preparation

Before using this script, ensure all the *DOCX* and *PDF* files you need to assess are stored in a single folder.

### Running the script

When you run the Python script, it will pop up a file explorer / finder window asking you to select the target folder.

Once you have done that, it will work through the assessment in the background. 

### Output

The assessment result is output as an *XLSX* file are saved in the same folder as the *DOCX* and *PDF* files. Each *DOCX* or *PDF* takes up a row, while the columns represent the various models. 

### Note

1. The script uses some standard *Python* libraries. If you don't have them installed on your system, then in the first run, the script will try to install these dependencies. If the script can't install these dependencies, for instance if your PC environment precludes it, then it will usually give you the console commands you can use to install these.
2. The script needs to download the models to run them on your computer. The models can be quite big. Hence, the first time you run this script, it may seem like it has frozen at the _Loading Hugging Face Models... step_. It likely hasn't - give it 10 minutes to an hour to download the required data. Subsequent runs will be quite fast.
3. If some of your libraries and executables sit outside the *Path*, such as if you don't have Admin rights to your work laptop, then you should include the folder addresses in the 'path.txt' file, which should sit in the same folder as the 'timetable*drafter.py' file, e.g. 'C:\Users\Username\AppData\Roaming\Python\Python313\Scripts' and 'C:\Users\Username\AppData\Roaming\Python\Python313\site-packages'.

## How does AI detection work?

Answering whether a text was written by a human or generated by an *LLM* is extraordinarily difficult, not least because *LLMs* are being continuously updated and new models being launched at a frantic pace - it is an ongoing cat-and-mouse game. Thus, it is important to understand at the outset that *no method is foolproof or guaranteed to be 100% accurate*.

There are broadly three popular algorithms (or methods) that are nevertheless useful:
* **Statistical Analysis** *(Perplexity and Burstiness)*: With a bit of oversimplification, we can say that *LLMs* generate text stochastically based on next-word probabilities. Because these aim for the most mathematically "predictable" sequence, the generated text normally has low *perplexity* / *entropy* (it is not highly surprising to a language model). Further, it often has low *burstiness* (sentence lengths and structures are highly uniform). Human writing can feature sudden shifts in vocabulary and sentence length / structure (high *perplexity* and *burstiness*). Statistical algorithms can utilise this understanding.
* **Transformer-based Classification**: Deep learning models can be explicitly trained on massive datasets of human-written and AI-generated texts to learn the subtle syntactic and semantic patterns that differentiate the two.
* **Zero-Shot Detection**: This method uses the probability functions of an *LLM* itself. It takes a piece of text, creates slight variations (*perturbations*) of it, and scores them. If the original text has a significantly higher probability score than the variations, that is a strong indication that the text was generated by that specific *LLM*.
* *(Niche)* **Watermak Detection**: Some *LLMs* will leave an invisible "signature" or "fingerprint" or "watermark" in the generated text. If the signature if found in a corpus, then the corpus contains at least some text generated by that *LLM*. As such watermarks are not publicly known, this technique is rarely explicitly employed by public models. Of course, it may be implicitly applied by deep learning classification models.

There are a few key considerations:

### Accuracy

Accuracy heavily depends on whether the text is purely AI-generated, "hybrid" (mixed human and AI), or obfuscated (AI text run through a paraphrasing tool). Similarly to advertised car mileage (or EV range), the "advertised" AI detection accuracy numbers are based on controlled tests and can differ wildly from real-life performance.

Commercial tools like *Copyleaks*, *TurnItIn*, and *Originality.ai* frequently claim accuracy rates between 94% and 99% on purely AI-generated text. *GPTZero* claims 89% to 93% accuracy for mixed texts and up to 99% for purely AI-generated ones. Transformer models often advertise 92% to 96% accuracy in controlled benchmark datasets. But as anyone who's done statistical analysis would have immediately spotted, even the notion of a single percentage number to depict accuracy is by itself misleading because the tools can yield both false positives (flagging human work as AI-generated) and false negatives (not flagging AI-generated work - often because it has been lightly edited or paraphrased by a human). The percentage accuracy rates usually refer to the true positive rate (*sensitivity*).

[Research](https://arxiv.org/abs/2306.15666) [bemoans](https://theconversation.com/why-its-so-hard-to-tell-if-a-piece-of-text-was-written-by-ai-even-for-ai-265181) low reliability of automated tools for detection of AI-generated tools. Indeed, *OpenAI*'s own *AI Text Classifier* achieved an abysmal [~26% accuracy rate](https://openai.com/index/new-ai-classifier-for-indicating-ai-written-text/) and was eventually quietly retired.

However, it is useful to understand that humans are also [terrible at distinguishing AI-generated texts from human-written ones](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2772766123000289), with overall positive identification rates of only 38% to 62%. If that sounds good, remember that a random coin-toss would have 50% accuracy.

### "Bias"

As non-native speakers of a language are more likely to write more standardised, uniform or formulaic text and use more standard vocabulary and rigid grammatical structures, detection algorithms that rely heavily on *perplexity* (predictability) or *burstiness* (idiomatic and structural uniformity) are prone to false positives (flagging human-written text as AI-generated) when assesing works of non-native speakers. In [one study](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666389923001307) on 91 *Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL)* essays from a Chinese forum and 88 US eighth-grade essays from the *Hewlett Foundation*’s *ASAP dataset*, AI-detectors accurately classified the US student essays, but incorrectly labeled more than half of the *TOEFL* essays as "AI-generated" (average false-positive rate: 61.3%).

For similar reasons, AI detectors also flag disproportionately high number of false positives for texts in domains that use *Controlled Natural Language (CNL)* including [technical, academic, and aerospace, etc](https://www.techtimes.com/articles/319137/20260626/ai-text-detectors-flag-polished-human-writing-ai-new-studies-expose-built-paradox.htm).

It may be fair to assume that this issue is particularly pronounced for English-language texts, due to its massive vocabulary (*thanks to absoption of words from Germanic, old Norse, Romance and colonial languages*), colloquial diversity and syntactic flexibility. However, accuracy is often an [even bigger concern for AI detection in other languages](https://detectiondrama.com/ai-detection-accuracy-by-language-2026/) because many AI detectors are created for or trained on English corpuses and then "adapted" for the target language, because the traditional statistical metrics may not be apprpriate for the language, and sometimes because of the lack of quality resources for training.

### Resources

Some models, especially the ones using *Zero-Shot Detection* can require high-spec CPU, GPU, RAM and hard disk space to run properly. This script is designed to run on the average home or work computer, and therefore avoids the resource-hungry models.

### What is an ensemble?

Different methods, and even different implementations of different algorithms, work differently, and therefore have different stengths, weaknesses and accuracy rates while dealing with different types of texts. Some are even specifically tuned to detect the output of specific *LLMs*. Hence, for a general-purpose application, it is useful to employ multiple models, or an "ensemble" of models. Commercial tools such as *TurnItIn*, *GPTZero* and *Copyleaks* generally use ensembles of various transformers and statistical algorithms.

In Machine Learning (ML), ensemble techniques such as Bootstrap Aggregating, Boosting and Stacking are used to train different models. In order to work "out of the box", this script uses pre-trained models in a *Heterogeneous Ensemble* acting as a *Committee of Experts*. In other word, each model provides its assessment of each file's text. Subsequently, you can choose to make your executive decisions based on a range of considerations.

### Which models does this script run?

This script's "ensemble" is composed of the following:

* **RoBERTa: OpenAI Base** *(roberta-base-openai-detector)*: GPT-2 output detector model released by *OpenAI*.

* **RoBERTa: OpenAI Large** *(roberta-large-openai-detector)*: GPT-2 output detector model released by *OpenAI*, fine-tuning a RoBERTa large model. This is included for scientific / research comparisons between the base model and the large model. This should not be used as a separate expert in the committee of experts - either the base or the large model should count, not both!

* **RoBERTa: ChatGPT Detector** *(Hello-SimpleAI/chatgpt-detector-roberta)*: Developed by researchers of the *Hello-SimpleAI* group, this model is trained on the mix of full-text and splitted sentences of answers from [Human ChatGPT Comparison Corpus (HC3)](https://arxiv.org/abs/2301.07597) dataset.

* **DeBERTa: GLYPH v1.1** *(ogmatrixllm/glyph-v1.1)*: *Lukas*' *GLYPH* is built on *DeBERTa-v3-base* trained on academic papers, news articles, blog posts, Reddit discussions, legal filings, Wikipedia, student essays, and technical Q&A on the human side, and outputs from 10 AI model families. *GLYPH* is highly regarded as it specifically utilises *DeBERTa*'s "disentangled attention" and was explicitly trained to eliminate biases against non-native speakers.

* **ModernBERT: AI Codex** *(AICodexLab/answerdotai-ModernBERT-base-ai-detector)*: *AICodexLab*'s model built on *ModernBERT-base*, trained on [*DAIGT V2 Train Dataset*](https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/thedrcat/daigt-v2-train-dataset/) - which includes *Vanderbilt*'s [*persuade corpus 2.0*](https://github.com/scrosseye/persuade_corpus_2.0) - and outputs from multiple AI model families.

* **Diverse: PirateXX Detector** *(PirateXX/AI-Content-Detector)*: *Arsh Kashyap*'s *AI Content Detector* is fine-tuned on a highly diverse, modern dataset (including *Claude* and *Gemini* outputs), ensures we aren't just scanning for *OpenAI* "fingerprints".

* *(optional, does not run by default)* **RoBERTa: OpenAI Base** *(pangram/editlens_roberta-large)*: *Pangram*'s [*EditLens*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.03154) is built on *roberta-large* base fine-tuned to distinguish AI-edited text (as opposed to text generated from scratch by AI) from human-written and AI-generated text to predict the amount of AI editing within a text. This script does not run it by default because it is locked behind a "gated repository". If you would like to run this model, you must [accept its terms and generate a Personal Access Token](https://huggingface.co/login?next=%2Fpangram%2Feditlens_roberta-large). Copy the Personal Access Token, and paste into a text file "*editlens_token.txt*" saved in the same folder in which you have saved this script (i.e., *ai_text_detector.py*).

* *(optional, does not run by default)* **Zero Shot: Binoculars** *(dmicz/binoculars-text-detection)*: *Dennis Miczek*'s [*Binoculars*](https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.12070) is a "Zero-Shot" detector with an extremely low false positive rate and a higher accuracy than other zero-shot detectors such as *Ghostbuster*, *GPTZero* and *DetectGPT*. This script does not run it by default because, being a zero shot classifier, it is massive and requires 15-30 GB of free RAM and a dedicated GPU. If you happen to have these resources, simply add an empty text file "*binoculars.txt*" in the same folder in which you have saved this script (i.e., *ai_text_detector.py*).
	
## Caveat

*LLMs* are probabilistic, as is "AI detection". A high score is not "proof" that the text was generated by an AI, and a low score is not "proof" that the text was written by (a) human(s).

*LLMs* are heavy. As this script is written for use on the average home or office PC, it deliberately avoids the more demanding models that require large amounts of GPU, RAM or storage. *Binoculars* is included, but not run by default since it would crash most average home and office PCs.

Tested on *Windows 11 Education 64-bit*.

Not tested on *Apple iOS* or *Linux*.

## Never run a Python script before?

It's straightforward, but you may need to install *Python* on your machine first.

### Install Python

*Anaconda* is one of the most popular distributions of *Python*. Download and install from https://www.anaconda.com/download

Installation is simple, but if you need help, check out https://www.anaconda.com/docs/getting-started/anaconda/install/overview

### Start Spyder

*Anaconda* comes with *Spyder IDE*. Start *Spyder*.

Once *Spyder* is ready, open the file '*ai_text_detector.py*' that has the script.

All that's left is for you to hit 'Run', i.e. the green 'Play' button.

## Frequently Asked Questions

### How can I interpret the scores?

A simplistic interpretation of the scores is that it is the model's assessment of the probability that the file's text was generated with an *LLM*.

The truth is slightly more complex. *BERT*-based models usually have a *token* limit (typically 512 *tokens*); hence, this script uses *Chunking* and *Aggregation*. In other words, it splits the text into chunks, feeds them to the model, and records the output. Once all chunks of a text have been assessed, it then aggregates the outputs to arrive at the final document-level score. So, the score is technically the average probability that the chunks were generated by AI across the entire document.

### How should I think about texts that are combinations of human and AI generated?

Because the final score is an average for the chunks, mixed texts will usually reflect the ratio of AI to human content. e.g., if someone writes a 6-page text and uses *ChatGPT* to generate 4 additional pages in entirety for a 10-page document, an accurate model will score the human pages at ~1% and the AI pages at ~99%. The final average will sit around 40% .

### There are multiple scores - each model outputs a different score. What if I just average them out?

That's how a *Soft Voting Ensemble* works. However, in this case, this is strongly discouraged.

Because the models use different methodologies and look for different things, a 70% from a *RoBERTa* model does not mean the exact same thing as a 70% from a *DeBERTa* model. If one model scores a document at 90% (because the sentence lengths are perfectly robotic) and another scores it at 10% (because it doesn't use standard *ChatGPT* vocabulary), averaging them gives 50%. That 50% is a meaningless number that masks the true nature of the text.

### How should I use the scores?

The ensemble is your panel of experts - high scores are indicative but are not proof of AI use.

When using this script for research, you may use a decision methodology that suits you, e.g.
* **OR gate**: If any of the models returns a score higher that your specific threshold, you can consider it a positive for the ensemble.
* **Unanimity**: You consider the output as a positive for the ensemble only if all models return scores higher that your specific threshold. *(in this case, it is advised not to separately count both OpenAI models - use only one of these at a maximum)*
* **Hard Voting / Consensus**: You consider the output as a positive for the ensemble if a majority of the models return scores higher that your specific threshold. *(in this case, it is advised not to separately count both OpenAI models - use only one of these at a maximum)*
* **Soft voting**: You would average the scores of different models, and compare that to your specific threshold. *(in this case, it is advised not to separately count both OpenAI models - use only one of these at a maximum)*
* **Other / None of the above**: You can apply your judgement to come up with another way to decide.

 In practical applications, high scores shouldn't result in an automatic verdict but rather could be used to trigger a human review, including but not limited to checking the document's metadata, scanning for hallucinated citations or fake references, having a conversation with the author(s), etc. 